# Coral-reefs-coverages
Change in coral reefs through time. Changes due to IOTA hurricane

# Hurricane IOTA’s impacts on coral reef coverages in the Seaflower Biosphere Reserve 

 

Diana Carolina Vergara-Florez1,2, Shaliny Ramirez Palma2 

Corporation Center of Excellence in Marine Sciences (CEMarin) - Early-Stage Researcher1  

Universidad de los Andes, Facultad de Ciencias, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Laboratorio de Biología Molecular Marina (BIOMMAR) 2 

___________________________________________________ 


## Introduction 

A hurricane is a warm-core, low-pressure system that develops over tropical or subtropical waters. While there is often thought that hurricanes only generate damage to the coastal, mangroves, and coral reef ecosystems, they may provide ecological benefits to tropical and sub-tropical environments (Wilkinson & Souter, 2008). For example, rainfall removes waste and weeds, clouds of a hurricane shade the ocean surface cooling and reducing light stress, winds and waves move sediment from bays into marsh areas, and can reduce the thermal stress decreasing sea surface temperature (Manzello et al., 2007). On the other hand, the known negative impact of hurricanes on reefs generated by waves and water movement significantly affects the structure, functioning, and distribution of coral assemblages (Harmelin-Vivien, 1994). Hurricanes are a primary cause of damage to corals and coral reefs (Massel & Done, 1993), often breaking coral branches and overturning colonies. Removed coral pieces can cause extra damage as they are propelled onto other parts of the reef (Wilkinson & Souter, 2008). A meta-analysis study carried out by Gardner et al., 2005 determined that the impact of hurricanes in the Caribbean between 1981 and 2001 has decreased coral cover at a significantly faster rate (6% per year) than in non-Caribbean sites impacted by the hurricane (2% per year).  

The Seaflower Biosphere Reserve as part of the Caribbean Sea belongs to the tropical basin of Atlantic cyclones (Páez Prens, Giraldo Lezcano, Usuga Flórez, Espinoza Echeverría & Ortíz, 2012). Here in zones as the Caribbean, tropical cyclonic storms have become more frequent and intense since about 1970, even with models predicting that cyclones are likely to be more intense, with more category 4 and 5 storms (Wilkinson & Souter, 2008). Among the hurricanes that have had an impact on the Archipelago are: Hurricane Hattie of 1961 category 3; Hurricane Joan in 1988, which reached a category 4 and passed at a distance of 90 km; Hurricane Cesar in 1996, which reached category 1 and passed at a distance of 65 km; Hurricane Mitch in 1998, which mainly affected Serrana and Serranilla; and BETA hurricane that passed through Providencia as a category 1 hurricane on October 22, 2005. Lastly, San Andres Island (SAI) and Providencia were affected by IOTA, a hurricane that attained Category 4, reached 8 kilometers from the island, and was hit by winds of up to 230 kilometers per hour. In this case, what may be the situation of the Seaflower Biosphere Reserve, precisely the south-east of San Andrés Island (SAI), with the passage of Hurricane IOTA in 2020? The purpose of the study will be to analyze from photo-quadrants the status of the coral reef coverage on San Andrés Island before and after the disturbance of Hurricane IOTA. In 2019, we performed SCUBA dives in the West View reef, producing a photo-_______ of 10x10m (Image available following the QR code). Our objective will be to perform the same photo____ in the same tagged site to evaluate the coverage change after the Hurricane IOTA. 

 
## Expected Results 

Possible results according to the article by Gardner et al., 2005: 

1. Recovery trajectory: Coral cover increases temporarily due to successful adhesion and growth of broken coral fragments during the storm, then returns to the normal growth rate it had before the storm. 

2. Stasis trajectory: Coral cover remains temporarily stable before starting to decline. 

3. Resumption trajectory: Coral cover immediately resumes its decline at pre-storm speed. 

4. Synergy trajectory: Coral cover immediately resumes its decline, but at a higher rate due to the synergistic effects between hurricanes and other causes of decline (bleaching). 

 

References 

Gardner, T. A., Côté, I. M., Gill, J. A., Grant, A., & Watkinson, A. R. (2005). Hurricanes and Caribbean coral reefs: impacts, recovery patterns, and role in long‐term decline. Ecology, 86(1), 174-184. 

Harmelin-Vivien, M. L. (1994). The effects of storms and cyclones on coral reefs: a review. Journal of Coastal Research, 211-231. 

Manzello DP, Brandt M, Smith TB, Lirman D, Hendee JC, Nemeth RS (2007). Hurricanes benefit bleached corals. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104:12035-12039. 

Massel SR, Done TJ (1993). Effects of cyclone waves on massive coral assemblages on the Great Barrier Reef: meteorology, hydrodynamics and demography. Coral Reefs 12:153-166 

Páez Prens, O. L., Giraldo Lezcano, J. M., Usuga Flórez, H. J., Espinoza Echeverría, J. M., & Ortíz, L. M. (2012). Actualización del plan de emergencias y contingencia en huracanes para la isla de San Andrés (Doctoral dissertation) 

Royero, J. C. O. (2007). Huracanes y tormentas tropicales en el Mar Caribe colombiano desde 1900. Boletín científico CIOH, (25), 54-60. 

Wilkinson, C. R., & Souter, D. (2008). Status of Caribbean coral reefs after bleaching and hurricanes in 2005. https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/486 

 
### 2019
Photomosaic – SAI - 2019 



### After IOTA? What happened to the SAI reefs?
